feat(docs): Added a page on module creation (#2456)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/docs/development/module-creation.md

---
title: Module Creation
sidebar_label: ZMK Module Creation
---

[ZMK modules](../features/modules.mdx) are the recommended method of adding content to ZMK, whenever it is possible. This page will guide you through creating a module for ZMK. Distinction is made between modules used for different purposes:

- Modules containing one or more keyboard-related definitions (boards, shields, interconnects, etc.)
- Modules containing behaviors & features
- Modules containing drivers

> - Modules containing visual effects

Reviewer: I am still not a big fan of this classification, maybe we can say
```suggestion
- Modules containing other features, such as visual effects
```

| ----------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `keyboard`  | The module contains definitions for one or multiple keyboards, be they boards or shields.                             |
| `component` | The module contains definitions for one or multiple components, such as boards for shields to use.                    |
| `behavior`  | The module contains a single behavior.                                                                                |
| `driver`    | The module contains a single driver.                                                                                  |
| `feature`   | The module contains a single feature which doesn't fall under the other categories.                                   |
| `vfx`       | The module contains definitions for one or multiple visual effects, such as display customisations or RGB animations. |

For each of these, you can use the singular or plural, i.e. `keyboard` and `keyboards` are both acceptable. Use your judgement to decide between the two.

> `<description>` is your choice of name to describe the module. See the names of other modules of your chosen type in the `zmk-modules` repository for examples.

Reviewer: I think this repo will not be present if we merge this first, right?

Note that your _module name_ does not have to be the same as your _repository name_. For example, if you have named your module `zmk-keyboards-corne`, you may for your own organisational purposes want to name the repository e.g. `zmk-corne-module`.

Your module name goes in the `zephyr/module.yml` file:

```yaml title="zephyr/module.yaml"
name: <your module name>
```

> #### Build Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Build options
```
Re-cased according to our internal convention

Next, you need to define the options to build your module. These also go into `zephyr/module.yml`, as children of the `build` property. Commonly used options are:

- The `depends` child property is used to specify a list of modules which the module depends on. The dependencies are referred to by their [module name](#module-name).

> - The `cmake` child property is used to identify a folder containing a `CMakeLists.txt` used to build the module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `cmake` child property is used to identify a folder containing a `CMakeLists.txt` file that lists the CMake commands used to build source files.
```

> - The `kconfig` child property is used to identify the `Kconfig` used to build the module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `kconfig` child property is used to identify the `Kconfig` file that defines configuration settings used by the module.
```

- `settings` is a child property containing additional child properties, two of which are particularly relevant:
  - `board_root` points to the parent directory of a `boards` directory, which contains additional board/shield definitions.
  - `dts_root` points to the parent directory of a `dts` directory, which contains additional devicetree bindings.

>   - `snippet_root` points to the parent directory of a `snippets` directory, which contains [snippets](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/snippets/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `snippet_root` points to the parent directory of a `snippets` directory, which contains [snippets](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.5.0/build/snippets/index.html).
```

It is recommended that you place the manifest file at the root of your module, though you can place it elsewhere. Be sure to note in your `README.md` that your module uses dependencies, so that users import these correctly.
Below is an example `west.yml` file for a user that would be using your module, with the necessary `import` field if the module has dependencies:

```yaml title="west.yml"
manifest:
  remotes:
    - name: remote-name
      url-base: https://github.com/remote-name
  projects:
    # Together with the above defined remote, this refers to a module located at
    # https://github.com/remote-name/repository-name
    - name: repository-name
      remote: remote-name
      # This points to a west manifest file in the remote module for further imports
      import: west.yml
```

See the [modules feature page](../features/modules.mdx) for additional information on using west manifest files.

### Informational Files

> Make sure to include a `README.md` file and a `LICENSE` file in your repository. Only modules with MIT-compatible licenses can be added to `zmk-modules`.

Reviewer: Here also, do we want to remove this remark in the short term?

| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `board/`         | Folder containing definitions for boards, shields and interconnects                   |
| `dts/`           | Folder containing devicetree bindings and includes with devicetree nodes (.dtsi)      |
| `CMakeLists.txt` | CMake configuration to specify source files to build                                  |
| `Kconfig`        | Kconfig file for the module                                                           |
| `include/`       | Folder for C header files                                                             |
| `src/`           | Folder for C source files                                                             |
| `snippets/`      | Folder for [snippets](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.5.0/build/snippets/index.html) |

Note that the `include` and `src` folders are not mandated by the module system, and all of these can be positioned anywhere in your module's filetree if you adjust the `zephyr/module.yml` accordingly. The `west.yml` file is not commonly present in any of the types.

> Modules should expose all provided header files with an include pathname beginning with the module-name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modules should expose all provided header files with an include path name beginning with the module-name, for example at `include/zmk_<type>_<description>/<header>.h`.
```
Replaced hyphens with underscores to fit C conventions.

Your module name goes in the `zephyr/module.yml` file:

```yaml title="zephyr/module.yaml"
name: <your module name>
```

#### Build options

Next, you need to define the options to build your module. These also go into `zephyr/module.yml`, as children of the `build` property. Commonly used options are:

- The `depends` child property is used to specify a list of modules which the module depends on. The dependencies are referred to by their [module name](#module-name).
- The `cmake` child property is used to identify a folder containing a `CMakeLists.txt` file that lists the CMake commands used to build source files.
- The `kconfig` child property is used to identify the `Kconfig` file that defines configuration settings used by the module.
- `settings` is a child property containing additional child properties, two of which are particularly relevant:
  - `board_root` points to the parent directory of a `boards` directory, which contains additional board/shield definitions.
  - `dts_root` points to the parent directory of a `dts` directory, which contains additional devicetree bindings.

>   - `snippet_root` points to the parent directory of a `snippets` directory, which contains [snippets](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.5.9/build/snippets/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `snippet_root` points to the parent directory of a `snippets` directory, which contains [snippets](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/3.5.0/build/snippets/index.html).
```

  remotes:
    - name: remote-name
      url-base: https://github.com/remote-name
  projects:
    # Together with the above defined remote, this refers to a module located at
    # https://github.com/remote-name/repository-name
    - name: repository-name
      remote: remote-name
      # This points to a west manifest file in the remote module for further imports
      import: west.yml
```

See the [modules feature page](../features/modules.mdx) for additional information on using west manifest files.

### Informational Files

Make sure to include a `README.md` file and a `LICENSE` file in your repository. Only modules with MIT-compatible licenses can be added to `zmk-modules`.

### Predefined Files and Folders

The repository comes with a number of files and folders already positioned for you to edit. The below table describes which files are most likely kept and which are most likely deleted, based on your module's type. Note that these aren't hard rules, merely the most common use case.

|                  | `keyboards` | `components` | `behavior` | `driver` | `feature` | `vfx` |
| ---------------- | ----------- | ------------ | ---------- | -------- | --------- | ----- |

> | `board/`         | ✅          | ✅           | ❌         | ❌       | ❌        | ✅    |

Author: The example I have in my head for said category is your RGB-LED module. I agree the details of the category would need some more work once ZMK's features around the area are more mature.

> | `board/`         | ✅          | ✅           | ❌         | ❌       | ❌        | ✅    |

Reviewer: Ah, I guess I'd consider it a feature if I had to classify.

> | `board/`         | ✅          | ✅           | ❌         | ❌       | ❌        | ✅    |

Author: Perhaps the classification there could use some additional distinction, but I'm also not sure what a better split would be. I'd certainly put it into vfx as it communicates stuff visually.

> | `board/`         | ✅          | ✅           | ❌         | ❌       | ❌        | ✅    |

Reviewer: I had considered the description to be more literal, like underglow effects & display/LVGL widgets -- I can see the rgbled-widget fitting under a similar context.

:::

Once you have written and tested your module, you should prepare it for inclusion into `zmk-modules`. The primary reasons for you wanting to do so are:

- It makes discovering and using your module significantly easier for other users
- Automated tools can help you maintain your module notifying you if there are any potentially breaking changes that you should investigate or new features that you may want to account for.

### Requirements

The following requirements are necessary for a module to be included in `zmk-modules`:

- [ ] The module is named according to convention
- [ ] The module has been tested and confirmed working
- [ ] The module features a `README.md` file describing the module
- [ ] The module is licensed under an MIT-compatible license, preferably through a `LICENSE` file
- [ ] The module follows the general style of other modules of the same type found in `zmk-modules`
- [ ] There are no unused files or folders present in the module
- [ ] The module is up-to-date with the current version of ZMK
- [ ] If the module defines keyboards or hardware components, said keyboards/components are available for public use (sold by a vendor, open source, etc.)

> - [ ] If the module defines boards or shields, they follow the "good board/shield definition practices"

Author: ```suggestion
- [ ] If the module defines boards or shields, they follow the board/shield definition practices as recommended in the ZMK docs
```
How about this, there are some things Zephyr recommends that we would recommend against, such as enabling the console by default.

Reviewer: That makes sense, I was thinking of board stuff which we don't have.
